The Empire of Japan's Kwantung Army invaded the Manchuria region of the Republic of China on 18 September 1931, immediately following the Mukden incident,[4] a false flag event staged by Japanese military personnel as a pretext to invade. At the war's end in February 1932, the Japanese established the puppet state of Manchukuo. The occupation lasted until mid-August 1945, towards the end of the Second World War, in the face of an onslaught by the Soviet Union and Mongolia during the Manchurian Strategic Offensive Operation.

With the invasion having attracted great international attention, the League of Nations produced the Lytton Commission (headed by British politician Victor Bulwer-Lytton) to evaluate the situation, with the organization delivering its findings in October 1932. Its findings and recommendations that the Japanese puppet state of Manchukuo not be recognized and the return of Manchuria to Chinese sovereignty prompted the Japanese government to withdraw from the League entirely.

Background

Japanese soldiers of 29th Regiment on the Mukden West Gate
Since the end of the Russo-Japanese war the Liaodong peninsula was a leased territory of Japan. Thus, Tokyo exercised informal rule over the Manchuria. Under Japanese control the economic gain was increased. By the End of the 1920s, 39.4 per cent of all colonial financial investments went into Manchuria. Japan was confronted in the early 1930s with two crucial problems. Due to the world finance crisis her economy had been in a state of chronic malaise for three years. In Manchuria, nationalists under the former Japanese ally Zhang Xueliang had aroused intense anti-Japanese sentiment.[5]

In 1928 Zhang reunited with the Kuomintang under Chiang Kai-shek, forming the Nationalist government As a result, Japan found itself increasingly deprived of its influence in Manchuria.[6] Radical groups within the Government and the Army schemed for the opportunity to act on the “Manchurian question.”[7] The Hamaguchi Government, and especially the non-interventionist policy in China of Foreign Minister Kijūrō Shidehara, was considered negative for future Japanese interests. In order to get rid of Shidehara's conciliatory policy radical military officers including Daisaku Komoto and Suzuki Teiichi planned a coup d’état to take over control of the civil government in Tokyo.[8]

Prelude
Main articles: Wanpaoshan incident and Mukden Incident
There were two pivotal events that eventually led up to the invasion of Manchuria. In July 1931, near Changchun in the Wanpaoshan region, a dispute over the construction of an irrigation system by Korean farmers on Chinese-owned land escalated into violence. Although no one had been killed or seriously wounded in the Wanpaoshan Incident, Japanese extremists seized this as a pretext to fuel anti-Chinese sentiment, hoping to promote a more aggressive Japanese policy in Manchuria.[9] Believing that taking full control of Manchuria would be in the best interests of Japan,[10] and acting in the spirit of the Japanese concept of (jap. 下克上, gekokujō the low overturns the high), [11] Kwantung Army Colonel Seishirō Itagaki and Lieutenant Colonel Kanji Ishiwara devised a plan to provoke Japan into invading Manchuria by setting up a false flag incident for the pretext of invasion. Meanwhile, central army authorities played up the Manchurian issue with the purpose of winning over the public to the cause of the coming expedition and also to create an atmosphere of imminence to forestall disarmament. Rumors of a Manchurian expedition began circulating in August and in early September, with the Government frequently questioned about whether there would soon be war in Manchuria.[12]

The operation was planned for 28 September, but was subsequently brought forward. On the night of 18 September a bomb was placed, probably by Captain Imada Shintaro of the Army Special Service Agency, near the tracks of the South Manchuria Railway at Mukden.[13] The bomb was far enough away to do no real damage. At around 10:20 pm (22:20) on September 18, the explosives were detonated.[a] Fighting between the Japanese Railway guards and Chinese soldiers quartered at a nearby barracks ensued. However, after fifteen hours of fierce combat all important military installations in and about Mukden were completely in the hands of the Japanese army.[15]

Initial annexation
On September 18, 1931, the Japanese Imperial General Headquarters, which had decided upon a policy of localizing the incident, communicated its decision to the Kwantung Army command. However, Kwantung Army commander-in-chief General Shigeru Honjō instead ordered his forces to proceed to expand operations all along the South Manchuria Railway.